kube-apiserver: allow unsupported files sync (#1480)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/kube-apiserver/unsupported-file-sync.md

  - tkashem
  - deads2k
approvers: # A single approver is preferred, the role of the approver is to raise important questions, help ensure the enhancement receives reviews from all applicable areas/SMEs, and determine when consensus is achieved such that the EP can move forward to implementation.  Having multiple approvers makes it difficult to determine who is responsible for the actual approval.
  - tkashem
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"
  - None
creation-date: yyyy-mm-dd
last-updated: yyyy-mm-dd
tracking-link: 
  - AUTH-387
see-also: []
replaces: []
superseded-by: []
---

# Unsupported file synchronization into kube-apiserver static pods

## Summary

Since kube-apiserver pods are running as static, it's hard to test upcoming features
that might require configuration via files. This enhancement describes how to synchronize
files to kube-apiserver pods in an unsupported mode that matches the testing use-case.

## Motivation

> Simplify testing features that might require additional files to be installed into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simplify testing features that might require additional files to be included in kube-apiserver pod configuration
```

Author: It's actually not a pod configuration, we're talking physical content inside of the pod.

Reviewer: right, but the primary target is adding new config files, not new binaries or replacing some content in the pod.

I think we should avoid the word "installing" here - it is too broad

kube-apiserver pods.

### User Stories

> * As a developer, I want to be able to create configuration/trust files in kube-apiserver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* As a developer, I want to be able to create additional configuration/trust files in kube-apiserver pod configuration
```

Author: I might go with `As a developer, I want to be able to create additional configuration/trust files inside of the kube-apiserver pod` if that's ok

Reviewer: yeah, that sounds good to me

secret `unsupported-kube-apiserver-content` that is going to be used to
install content inside of the `/etc/kubernetes/unsupported/kube-apiserver` directory.
This secret will be populated by an observer inside of the cluster-kube-apiserver-operator.
The observer watches the `unsupported-kube-apiserver-content` secret in
the `openshift-config` namespace and synchronizes its content to the
secret inside of the `openshift-kube-apiserver-namespace`.

### Workflow Description

The user adds content to the `data` and `stringData` maps in the
`openshift-config/unsupported-kube-apiserver-content` secret and
waits for a rollout of a new kube-apiserver revision that contains their changes.

### API Extensions

No API extensions.

### Implementation Details

#### New kube-apiserver operator observer

A new observer is added to the cluster-kube-apiserver-operator. This observer
watches the `data` and `stringData` fields of the `openshift-config/unsupported-kube-apiserver-content`
secrets and synchronizes them to the `openshift-kube-apiserver-operator/unsupported-kube-apiserver-content`
secret.

If the `data` or `stringData` fields of the source secret are non-empty, the observer

> sets the `UnsupportedFilesUpgradeable: False` condition in the `kube-apiserver`

Reviewer: Wouldn't it be best to split `UnsupportedConfigFilesPresent: True` and `Upgradable: False` - iiuc CVO still looks for Upgradable only

Author: No. The `Upgradeable` clusteroperator is a condition that is aggregated from all `*Upgradeable` conditions set in the `kubeapiservers.operator.openshift.io/cluster` objects.

I should perhaps clarify that by `kube-apiserver` clusteroperator I actually mean the `operator` API group object.

Author: See https://github.com/openshift/library-go/blob/d7e7beca5baea998564ed16bd3d7e7dffbc7c01f/pkg/operator/status/status_controller.go#L123 for how the condition aggregation works.

Reviewer: Ah, I was not aware. LGTM then

directory.

In order to accommodate these changes, the [installer command](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-kube-apiserver-operator/blob/ab3736b9773f1b9850fb046226a1ca8b4342cb1c/vendor/github.com/openshift/library-go/pkg/operator/staticpod/installerpod/cmd.go#L85-L86)
and the [installer controller](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-kube-apiserver-operator/blob/ab3736b9773f1b9850fb046226a1ca8b4342cb1c/vendor/github.com/openshift/library-go/pkg/operator/staticpod/controller/installer/installer_controller.go#L156)
need to be extended. This functionality should be optional, with an opt-in scheme.

### Risks and Mitigations

**Risk**: somebody breaks their cluster so badly it's no longer recoverable and opens a support case.
**Mitigation**: support shrugs and closes that case when they notice unsupported config was active.

### Drawbacks

This allows installing random files on control-plane nodes' disks. However, we
control the directory where such files are installed, and we specifically mark
any cluster with such a configuration as unsupported.

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

> - Should the `*Upgradable: False` condition be reported by a different controller

Reviewer: imo kube-apiserver-operator should switch to Upgradable=False if this secret exists. We don't know how this configuration affects upgradability and should be defensive here

Author: I don't mind either way. But you can still have active pods of a previous revision that still use the unsupported files, which is where this question is aimed.

Reviewer: you mean some pods which didn't yet apply a new config are upgradable? Yes, but not the cluster as whole

Author: 1. you remove the secret
2. you set upgradable true because the secret (or its values don't exist)
3. new kube-apiserver pods' revision starts rolling out
4. an old revision is still active, new revision may fail to rollout
5. the cluster no longer reports upgradable:false since 2., but the unupgradable revision is still active
